---
title: "2022 / Day 02: lines"
date: 2022-11-02T09:15:50+03:00
draft: false
og_image: "../img/30daymapchallenge/thumb.png"
description: "#30DayMapChallenge: Generating lines between node-pairs in PostGIS."
---

Moving on with generative SQL. This exercise attempts to create a set of
linestrings which would connect nodes on all four sides of a square box (
in this instance as well as yesterday i was using the bbox of
[epsg:3301](http://epsg.io/3301) based tile gridset) so that all nodes would be
connected with every other node except the ones on the same side.

This time around there's a lot of `lateral join`s, and in real life most of
these CTE queries should/could be written to temporary tables in order
to enforce indexes etc. But staying with the spirit of
_it has to run as a single statement_, well... yes.

Some (but not all) PostGIS functions that are doing the heavy lifting here:

- [`st_makeline`](https://postgis.net/docs/ST_MakeLine.html) to construct a line
  based on a bunch of consecutive points. Although there are variants of
  _two-point-makeline_ and _aggregate-makeline_, over the years i've really grown
  accustomed to `st_makeline(array[a.geom, b.geom])` and
  `st_makeline(array_agg(a.geom order by a.i))`. Maybe because using arrays
  seems to make everything fancier?
- [`st_dumppoints`](https://postgis.net/docs/ST_DumpPoints.html) to extract all
  nodes of a geometry. NB! pay attention to the composition of the returned
  `geometry_dump.path` composition. This will vary depending the type of
  geometry fed into the function
- [`st_segmentize`](https://postgis.net/docs/ST_Segmentize.html) to create more
  nodes on a linestring (or polygon boundary for that matter) so that no
  segment (linestring bit between two consecutive nodes) is longer than the
  input distance.

The basic idea behind this query is to create a square box, dump the corner
nodes with [`st_dumppoints`](https://postgis.net/docs/ST_DumpPoints.html)
and create segments (of two consecutive nodes of the ring).

**NB!** As of PostGIS 3.2 we can use
[`st_dumpsegments`](https://postgis.net/docs/ST_DumpSegments.html)
instead of

```
select st_makeline(array[pt.geom, lead(pt.geom) over (order by pt.path)]
from st_dumppoints(geom) pt)
```

to achieve the same thing.

Now for every returned segment, lets add extra points every 10000 meters with
[`st_segmentize`](https://postgis.net/docs/ST_Segmentize.html), and
[`st_dumppoints`](https://postgis.net/docs/ST_DumpPoints.html) to extract all
points of the box.

Select unique nodes by [`st_union`](https://postgis.net/docs/ST_Union.html)
followed by [`st_dump`](https://postgis.net/docs/ST_Dump.html) to get node
geometries and identifiers.

For every box point find the closest node and it's identifier
with a lateral join and [st_dwithin](https://postgis.net/docs/ST_DWithin.html)
selecting the closest with

```
order by nodes.geom <-> box_points.geom
limit 1
```

And finally all that's left to do is to find all possible combinations of nodes,
and [`st_makeline`](https://postgis.net/docs/ST_MakeLine.html) out of these. I'm
using ordering by `node_id` value so I can select only unique lines. Meaning if
there's a line going from A->B then I don't want/need the reversed B->A in the
output.

And done...

[output image](https://tkardi.ee/writeup/img/30daymapchallenge/2022/day-2-lines.png)

{{< highlight sql >}}
with
    /* minmax defines the corners where we create a set of random points. */
    minmax as (
        select
            st_point(40500.000000,5993000.000000,3301) as ll,
            st_point(1064500.000000,7017000.000000,3301) as ur
    ),
    /* bounds gives the envelope for them  */
    bounds as (
        select
            1 as id,
            st_envelope(
                st_collect(
                    array[ll, ur]
                )
            ) as geom
        from minmax
    ),
    /* extract envelope sides (4 pcs) */
    box_lines as (
        select
            bounds.id,
            pt.path[2] as p,
            st_makeline(
                array[
                    pt.geom,
                    lead(pt.geom) over (
                        partition by bounds.id, pt.path[1]
                        order by pt.path[2]
                    )
                ]
            )::geometry(linestring, 3301) as geom,
            min(x) over (partition by bounds.id, pt.path[1]) as minx,
            min(y) over (partition by bounds.id, pt.path[1]) as miny,
            max(x) over (partition by bounds.id, pt.path[1]) as maxx,
            max(y) over (partition by bounds.id, pt.path[1]) as maxy
        from
            bounds
                join lateral
                    st_dumppoints(bounds.geom) pt on true
                join lateral
                    st_x(pt.geom) as x on true
                join lateral
                    st_y(pt.geom) as y on true
    ),
    /* generate points - segmentize the box side line by 50 km */
    box_pts as (
        select
            id as box_id, p as box_side, minx, miny, maxx, maxy, x, y,
            pts.geom, pts.path[1] as ord,
            max(pts.path[1]) over (partition by id, p) as max_ord_on_side
        from
            box_lines
                join lateral
                    st_segmentize(geom, 50000) seg on true
                join lateral
                    st_dumppoints(seg) pts on true
                join lateral
                    st_x(pts.geom) x on true
                join lateral
                    st_y(pts.geom) y on true
        where
            p < 5
    ),
    /* generate "singular" nodes and unique node_ids */
    nodes as (
        select
            path[1] as node_id, geom as geom
        from (
            select
                (st_dump(st_union(box_pts.geom))).*
            from
                box_pts
        ) n
    ),
    /* merge box_pts with nodes - essentially assigns node_ids to box_pts */
    pts as (
        select
            p.box_id, p.box_side, p.geom, p.ord
            p.x, p.y, p.minx, p.miny, p.maxx, p.maxy,
            n.node_id
        from
            box_pts p
                join lateral (
                    select node_id
                    from nodes
                    where st_dwithin(nodes.geom, p.geom, 1)
                    order by nodes.geom <-> p.geom
                    limit 1
                ) n on true
    )
/* ... AND create the linework connecting every node to every other node
   unless the nodes are on the same side of the box.
*/
select
    row_number() over()::int as oid, box_id, node_ids, geom, st_length(geom)
from (
    select
        /* get distinct pairs regardless on direction by */
        --distinct on (node_ids)
        /* OR INSTEAD: */
        row_number() over (partition by box_id, node_ids) as x,
        box_id, node_ids, geom
    from (
        select
            a.box_id,
            case
                when a.node_id < b.node_id then st_makeline(array[a.geom, b.geom])
                else st_makeline(array[b.geom, a.geom])
            end as geom,
            case
                when a.node_id < b.node_id then array[a.node_id, b.node_id]
                else array[b.node_id, a.node_id]
            end as node_ids
        from
            pts a,
            pts b
        where
            a.box_id = b.box_id and
            a.box_side != b.box_side and (
                (
                    not (a.y = b.y or a.x = b.x ) or
                    (a.y = b.y and a.y != all(array[a.miny, a.maxy])) or
                    (a.x = b.x and a.x != all(array[a.minx, a.maxx]))
                ) or  (
                    a.ord = 1 and
                    b.ord = 1
                )
            )
    ) v
) b
where
    x = 1
;
{{</ highlight >}}
